Improve error messages for phantom db entries (#18101)
canonical/lxd: doc/howto/cluster_recover_volumes.md

(cluster-recover-volumes)=
# How to recover phantom volume database entries

> When a cluster migration (`lxc move <instance> --target <member>`) is interrupted mid-transfer (for example, due to a network failure or a killed LXD process), the target member may be left with a volume record in the global database that has no corresponding storage on disk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a {ref}`cluster instance migration <howto-cluster-manage-instance-migrate>` or {ref}`custom volume migration <howto-storage-move-volume-cluster> is interrupted mid-transfer (for example, due to a network failure or a killed LXD process), the target member may be left with a volume record in the global database that has no corresponding storage on disk.
```

I would like to see both instance migration and volume migration mentioned in the introduction like this, since this page covers how to deal with failures in both. 

In `doc > howto > storage_move_volume.md`, line 79 (above `## Copy or migrate between cluster members`, you will need to add the ref target used above, like this:
```
(howto-storage-move-volume-cluster)=
```

These phantom entries block future migrations for the affected instance or custom volume with an error like:

>     Volume "myinstance" exists in database on member "node2" but not on storage

Reviewer 2: Please avoid mentioning "node" in docs or error messages.

We say "cluster member" or "member"

Author: Thanks, I'll be doing those changes soon :sparkle:

## Recover instance volumes

### Identify phantom entries

List all volume entries for the affected instance across cluster members:

    lxd sql global "SELECT storage_volumes.id, storage_volumes.name, nodes.name AS member FROM storage_volumes JOIN nodes ON storage_volumes.node_id = nodes.id WHERE storage_volumes.name = '<instance-name>'"

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Replace `<instance-name>` with the name of the affected instance.
```

Phantom entries appear as rows on a member where the instance does not actually reside and no storage exists on disk.

### Remove phantom entries

Once you have identified the phantom entry, remove it with:

    lxd sql global "DELETE FROM storage_volumes WHERE name='<instance-name>' AND node_id=(SELECT id FROM nodes WHERE name='<member-name>')"

> Replace `<instance-name>` with the name of the instance and `<member-name>` with the cluster member that holds the phantom entry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replace `instance-name`, as well as `<member-name>` with the cluster member that holds the phantom entry.
```

After removing the phantom entry, retry the migration:

>     lxc move <instance> --target <member>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After removing the phantom entry, retry the {ref}`instance migration <howto-cluster-manage-instance-migrate>`
```
We don't need to duplicate the command here when we can point to the how-to guide for this. If the use of the command changes in the future, then we won't need to update it in multiple places.

## Recover custom volumes

The same issue can occur with custom storage volumes during migration.

### Identify phantom entries

List all volume entries for the affected custom volume across cluster members:

    lxd sql global "SELECT storage_volumes.id, storage_volumes.name, nodes.name AS member FROM storage_volumes JOIN nodes ON storage_volumes.node_id = nodes.id WHERE storage_volumes.name = '<volume-name>'"

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Replace `<volume-name>` with the name of the custom volume.
```

Phantom entries appear as rows on a member where the volume does not actually reside and no storage exists on disk.

### Remove phantom entries

Once you have identified the phantom entry, remove it with:

    lxd sql global "DELETE FROM storage_volumes WHERE name='<volume-name>' AND node_id=(SELECT id FROM nodes WHERE name='<member-name>')"

> Replace `<volume-name>` with the name of the custom volume and `<member-name>` with the cluster member that holds the phantom entry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replace `<volume-name>`, as well as `<member-name>` with the cluster member that holds the phantom entry.
```

After removing the phantom entry, retry the migration:

>     lxc storage volume move <pool>/<volume-name> --target <member>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After removing the phantom entry, retry the {ref}`volume migration <howto-storage-move-volume-cluster>`.
```
